---
title: "Lavinia Williams"
---
---

{% include feature/image.html objectid="f01" width="75" caption="Photograph of Lavinia Williams from a Carifesta feature article in Guyana's <i>Sunday Graphic</i>" %}

One of the most prominent representatives of Haiti during Carifesta was actually an American. Her name was Lavinia Williams. A classically trained African-American dancer who worked with, among others, Katherine Dunham and Agnes de Mille, Williams had become a prominent figure in the performing arts world by the 1950s as a prominent member of Dunham’s touring company.  She had initially moved to Haiti in April 1953 for a six-month teaching gig, having been invited by Haitian officials she met in New York in 1951. With her technical prowess and training, she promised to both modernize and universalize traditional Haitian vodou dance forms. She ended up staying in Haiti for the next two decades, founding the Haitian Academy of Folklore and Classic Dance and becoming one of the country’s most prominent cultural ambassadors.[^lavinia-williams-1] Her legacy is troubled, however, by the Haitian autocrats whose violent and repressive government she served, François “Papa Doc” Duvalier and his son Jean-Claude “Baby Doc.” Just like them, she romanticized and used vodou to excuse the impoverishment of the Haitian people. She told a Carifesta reporter: “Many people have always wondered why, although Haitians are poor materially, there is no crime wave, riots, strikes and labour unrest in their country, but the reason for this social phenomenon is voodoo.”[^lavinia-williams-2] Nothing could be farther from the truth–not only was there plenty of unrest in Haiti during the Duvalier era, but throughout Haitian history, vodou has served as a catalyst of revolt.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="f02" width="75" caption="Collage of Williams' Haitian dancers from a Carifesta '72 brochure" %}

Williams attended Carifesta 1972 in Guyana as manager and choreographer of Haiti’s National Ballet Company (Ballet d’Haiti), which had sent fourteen dancers to the festival. However, the Guyanese reception of Williams’ work and the Haitian vodou she was thought to represent on stage repeated certain stereotypes. For instance, the caption to this newspaper illustration of Williams’ dance minimized the difference between her stylized version of Haitian traditional dance movements and the real-life “ritual” that is part of the “life style of the people of the Haitian Republic.” Another article called Haiti a “Fairyland of Voodoo Drums and Strange Ritual Dance.”[^lavinia-williams-3] 

Guyanese culture was no less influenced by African religious practices–for instance in the drums and dances of Cumfa (or Komfa)–but you wouldn’t know it from these articles. In a festival profile of Williams, a journalist wrote: “We in this part of the world tend to regard voodooism with a mixture of fear, curiosity - and amusement, but if you ask Lavinia about casting spells and sticking pins into dolls, she would frown seriously and proceed to give you a disquisition on the influence of the voo-doo cult on the nation of Haiti.” One wonders how and why these stereotypes persisted even in a country like Guyana.

Lavinia herself did not dance during the festival, she told reporters, “since I have to do all the stage managing and the reading on stage before the dances and I also have to overlook costumes and equipment.” Evidently, then, Williams incorporated a “disquisition” into the performance, perhaps precisely in order to combat the ignorance about Haiti that was prevalent even in the Caribbean. Her choreographies were not just symbolic or ritualistic, but based in Haitian history, too. One of them was a “dance based on the revolution of 1791 featuring the acts of a rebel slave Boukinan [Boukman].”[^lavinia-williams-4] Williams refers to Boukman, one of the leaders of the Haitian revolution who, together with Cécile Fatiman, presided over the religious ceremony at Bois Caïman that launched the revolt.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="f03" width="75" caption="Newspaper article on William's teaching plans" %}

Also part of Williams’ busy Carifesta schedule was her morning dance masterclass at the Guyana Teachers’ Association. According to the festival timetable, she held her dance classes between 10am and 12.30pm. She was scheduled to lead eight workshops, but the Haitian delegation was called back by the government five days before the festival’s ending, so she handed her last three sessions over to a fellow African-American dancer, Chuck Davis.[^lavinia-williams-5] He recalled the situation in an interview, many years later:

>While I was there [at Carifesta], Lavinia Williams was teaching Haitian dance forms as a part of the series. The government called her back to Haiti. And she saw me and she says, “Chuck, I have to go back to Haiti, take over my classes, I don’t want to cancel,” so she said, “will you take over my >classes?” So they made arrangements for somebody to pick me up from where I was then and I came over [...]. I wasn’t teaching Haitian! I was teaching what I knew was dance, and at that point you know their traditions, and the class was exciting, and she had about twelve, and after the 3rd day I had about 40 people.

 Her masterclass was so popular and successful that Williams promised to return to Guyana as a teacher. Reportedly, she was "so impressed with the natural aptitude of the Guyanese people for music and dancing that she is hoping to start classes locally at the National Cultural Centre or the University of Guyana to teach voodoo dancing and drumming.”[^lavinia-williams-6]

[^lavinia-williams-1]: Guyana Graphic. “Lavinia Wants to Teach Us Voodoo Dancing.” September 11, 1972.
[^lavinia-williams-2]: Polyné, Millery. “‘To Carry the Dance of the People Beyond’: Jean Léon Destiné, Lavinia Williams, and Danse Folklorique Haïtienne.” In Rhythms of the Afro-Atlantic World, edited by Ifeoma Nwankwo, 136–57. University of Michigan Press, 2010.
[^lavinia-williams-3]: Hunter, Oliver. “Haiti and Carifesta: Fairyland of Voodoo Drums and Strange Ritual Dance.” Sunday Chronicle, June 25, 1972.
[^lavinia-williams-4]: Sunday Graphic. “Lavinia - The Sheer Joy of Dance and Life.” September 3, 1972.
[^lavinia-williams-5]: Davis, Chuck. Interview with Chuck Davis. Interview by Sally Sommer. Sound cassette, April 23, 2001. MGZTC 3-2322. Performing Arts Research Collections - Dance, New York Public Library.
[^lavinia-williams-6]: “Lavinia Wants to Teach Us Voodoo Dancing.”
