---
title: "Honor Ford-Smith and the Sistren"
---
---
{% include feature/image.html objectid="h01" width="75" caption="Honor Ford-Smith, “Sistren,” <i>Fuse: The Cultural News Magazine</i>, December 1981. Photograph by Isobel Harry." %}

Women’s unemployment was a pressing issue in Jamaica during the 1970s. As one women’s advocacy group wrote in 1981, “the burden of unemployment in the region falls heaviest on women,” their unemployment rate being about double that of men.[^sistren-1] Some escaped unemployment to work as street cleaners and in other temporary jobs under Prime Minister Michael Manley’s Special Employment Programme (SEP). Of the 14,000 people in the program, about 10,000 were women. The future members of the Sistren Theatre Collective, one of Jamaica’s foremost grassroots theater groups, first encountered theater when they received SEP training to work as teachers’ aides and prepared to perform at the 1977 Workers’ Week festival. A teacher at the Jamaica school of drama at the time, Honor Ford-Smith described how she guided twelve future Sistren’s efforts:[^sistren-2]

<blockquote class="blockquote d-flex flex-column align-items-center">
<p>
“I first met Sistren in 1977, in an old broken down schoolhouse in Swallowfield where we came together to discuss ideas for a play for Workers' Week, I asked them: 'What do you want to do a play about?' They said: 'We want to do plays about how we suffer as women. We want to do plays about how men treat us bad.' 'How do you suffer as women?' I asked, and we began the Iong process of exchange of personal history out of which our first piece of work evolved.”
</p>
</blockquote>

At this time, the twelve founding Sistren were Lorna Burrell-Haslam, Pauline Crawford, Beverley Elliot, Lillian Foster, Lana Finikin, Barbara Gayle, Beverley Hanson, Rebecca Knowles, Vivette Lewis,Jasmine Smith, Cerene Stephenson, and Jerline Todd. Together, they would create one of the Caribbean’s most influential theater groups. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="h02" width="75" caption="Photograph by Guus Dubbelman, in Honor Ford-Smith, “Sistren: Exploring Women’s Problems through Drama,” <i>Jamaica Journal</i>, 1986, 6. Original caption: LUNCHTIME IN THE EVENTIDE YARD: Hopie (Beverly Hanson) tries to persuade Eva (Rebecca Knowles) to pay for her lunch in one of the tragic scenes, touched with humour from the play <i>QPH</i>." %}

Sistren’s collective process of autobiographical theater-making doubles as consciousness-raising. It has drawn comparison to other activist theater methods, such as Augusto Boal’s *Theatre of the Oppressed*. Their first piece, *Downpression Get a Blow*, proved such a success that Ford-Smith was asked to continue working with the Sistren. Sistren drew deeply from Afro-Caribbean women’s history, traditional ring games, religious rituals, other aspects of vernacular culture to dramatize women’s economic disenfranchisement and societal taboos like domestic violence and prostitution. Over the years, Sistren performed field research and conducted workshops with women in a variety of economic sectors, such as market vendors (“higglers”) and sugar plantation workers.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="h03" width="75" caption="Photograph by Guus Dubbelman, in Honor Ford-Smith, “Sistren: Exploring Women’s Problems through Drama,” <i>Jamaica Journal</i>, 1986, 7. Original caption: Sister James (Jasmine Smith) helps Queenie (Beverley Elliott) to prepare for a revival meeting - a scene from Sistren's award-winning play <i>QPH</i>." %}

By 1981, Sistren had become prominent in Jamaica, having won several awards for the play *Bellywoman Bangarang* (1978) and staged two newer plays, *Bandaloo Version* (1979) and *Nana Yah* (1980). Still, Sistren became highly controversial. Ford-Smith noted that some of the participating women were threatened by men who felt that the women were abandoning their homes and duties. Some of the women, too, felt a deep sense of guilt toward their families after working long rehearsals. One performance of Bellywoman Bangarang “was attacked by hostile (male) spectators in Montego Bay during the tense months leading up to the 1984 elections.”[^sistren-3] In our interview, Ford-Smith also recalled how a filming of *QPH* was terminated by the Jamaica Labour Party government’s perception of its subversive intent."

In 1980, the new right-wing PM Edward Seaga shut off funding for cultural development programs and Manley’s SEP, leaving most of Sistren's members unemployed. Despite the SEP’s good intentions, the actual results had fallen short: “the unemployment rate for women rose from 34.6 percent in 1972 to 38.7 percent in 1979,” according to one report.[^sistren-4] The group scraped by on temporary grant funding from North American NGO’s, which had little patience for anything but economic development. NGO funding for initiatives like Sistren and the Women and Development Unit (WAND) at the University of the West Indies had become available in part thanks to the United Nations’ declaration of the ‘Decade for Women’ (1976-1985) and grants from the Ford Foundation, the Inter-American Fund, and CUSCO (Canadian University Service Overseas). However, the creative constraints of dependency on foreign development aid would multiply over the years, and Sistren would become largely self-reliant.[^sistren-5] They did so by initiating small-scale commercial initiatives, such as screen-printing.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="h04" width="75" caption="WAND's Women in Culture symposium program from <i>Woman Speak! A Quarterly Newsletter about Caribbean Women</i>, 1981." %}

The Sistren finally toured Carifesta in 1981, but as Ford-Smith remembers it, their invitation was by no means guaranteed. At Carifesta, the Sistren were not part of the ‘official’ Jamaican delegation, since entry to the festival was highly regulated by the government: “anyone who is afoul of the state doesn’t get to go,” as Ford-Smith put it. She pointed to the administrative feats of Peggy Antrobus, a WAND founder and formerly the Advisor on Women’s Affairs under Manley, who helped get Sistren on the program: “people like Peggy were well-enough positioned to get a slot that wasn’t necessarily government-approved.” Even the WAND forum itself was nowhere to be found on the official festival brochures.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="h05;h06" width="75" caption="Still from a video recording of the Sistren's workshop at the Carifesta 1981 WAND symposium.;Still from a video recording of the Sistren's workshop at the Carifesta 1981 WAND symposium."%}

As Carifesta was “the first time that the Sistren took a trip outside Jamaica, it was exciting for everyone,” Ford-Smith said. They participated in the “Women and Culture” forum, gave community workshops around Barbados, and performed their latest play *Queenie, Pearlie, Hopie.* Videographer Ronnie Carrington filmed highlights of the WAND forum and distributed them to national television and radio stations in the region. It appears that a related documentary was produced by journalist-broadcaster Lorna Gordon, but we have not been able to track this down. The festival’s Thursday session on the state of Caribbean theater also featured an earlier documentary film from 1979 about the work of Sistren by the Caribbean Institute of Mass Communication (CARIMAC), University of the West Indies, Jamaica.

True to their mission, Sistren did not just come to perform a play at Carifesta. At the WAND forum, they led an interactive workshop on how women could learn to recognize their interests and fight for the recognition of their labor–both in the workplace and in the home--to secure legal protection and better wages. Their workshop asked the audience to imagine another world, where working women acted as one. As Margaret Hope recalled in her report on the event, “the group is given material telling them that there is a general strike of women in the workplace and at home in the mythical Caribbean islands of Madata.”[^sistren-6] The name of these islands evokes the future generations of Caribbean women. Pronounced in Patois, *madata* sounds like *my daughter*. For the Sistren, their daughters’ futures are at stake.

Hope further noted that audience membmers were "given letters from the strikers and a list of statistics from the Department of Women's Affairs.” The letters described the resulting chaos: “the entire economy has stopped functioning, the service sector is crippled and gangs of children are roaming the street.” Next, the strikers acted out the women’s problems in several economic roles they might occupy: "the rural woman," "the domestic helper who is aging," "the nurse," the secretary," and the “wage worker."[^sistren-7] The crux of the workshop came in a move borrowed from Boal’s *Theatre of the Oppressed*, when the strikers started discussing their demands and positions with the live audience: “Every Mother is a Working Mother,” one sign said; “Freedom from Domestic Slavery,” said another.

{% include feature/pdf.html objectid="h07" width="75" caption="Program for the Sistren Theatre Collective's production of <i>Queenie, Pearlie, Hopie</i> at Carifesta '81 in Barbados." %}

The play Sistren presented at Carifesta–*Queenie, Pearlie, Hopie*–memorializes a senseless tragedy. These three names stand for lost lives of Eventide, an old Kingston almshouse for destitute elderly women that burnt down on a May night in 1980. The case was never solved and the 157 women were largely forgotten after the media circus moved on. The tragedy, really, was twofold. How did these women end up living out their lives in an overcrowded tinderbox? How could our society let its elderly die like this?

The play does not answer this question directly, but instead presents scenes from each of the three lives to give the audience a sense of their loss. Through the Afro-Jamaican practice of Etu ritual dance and song, each woman’s life is remembered and restaged in community. Etu is a set of Yoruba-derived commemorative ceremonies practiced in the northwestern parish of “Hanover by people claiming to be direct descendants of Nigerians brought to Jamaica as slaves between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries."[^sistren-8] After extensive research on this endangered practice, guest director Hertencer Lindsay ensured that the use of Etu as a theatrical device was accurate. She notes that Etu “invites ancestors to come and watch and then carry the spirits of the newly departed over.”[^sistren-9] As Ford-Smith told us, “*QPH* overlapped with some of the other attempts to move forward postcolonial vocabularies of dance and music and language” such as Dennis Scott’s *An Echo in the Bone*, which is structured around the ritual of the ninth-night wake.

Etu involves the "shawling" of one dancer by another "as a mark of appreciation and encouragement by the leader or queen" of the group.[^sistren-10] Each of the three biographical scenes begin with the shawling of Hopie, Pearlie, and Queenie. The other 154 women are not forgotten, however, as they are represented by the “chorus” who sing and chant during the rituals. The play culminates in Queenie’s impassioned speech to the off-stage “Investigative Commission” appointed by the government to investigate the Eventide case.

Surinamese theater director Henk Tjon attended the play and was greatly impressed: "Here's a theater collective that has the energy to lead a movement, to provoke ideas about what should be done; a group that gets involved in society's issues and presents a distinct identity. They did not perform often at Carifesta, but they worked with people in a hospital and a factory. It's a theater of consciousness."[^sistren-11]

{% include feature/image.html objectid="h08" width="75" caption="Photograph courtesy of Kanika Batra, Honor Ford-Smith, and Sistren. Original print publication in Kanika Batra, <i>Feminist Visions and Queer Futures in Postcolonial Drama: Community, Kinship, and Citizenship</i> (Routledge, 2011), 53. Original caption: Queenie, the Pukkumina mother, played by Bev “Didi” Elliot, addresses her flock in the collective creation of <i>QPH</i>, directed by Hertencer Lindsay. The actresses stand on coffins with a cutout of the moon as backdrop." %}

[^sistren-1]: “Editorial,” Woman Speak! A Quarterly Newsletter about Caribbean Women, 1981.
[^sistren-2]: Honor Ford-Smith, “Sistren: Exploring Women’s Problems through Drama,” Jamaica Journal, 1986.
[^sistren-3]: Rhonda Cobham-Sander, “‘A Wha Kind a Pen Dis?’: The Function of Ritual Frameworks in Sistren’s Bellywoman Bangarang,” Theatre Research International 15, no. 3 (1990): 233–49, 248n2.
[^sistren-4]: Robert Carr, “Struggles from the Periphery: Sistren and the Politics of Subaltern Autobiography,” Dispositio 19, no. 46 (1994): 127–45, 130.
[^sistren-5]: Honor Ford-Smith, “Ring Ding in a Tight Corner: Sistren, Collective Democracy, and the Organization of Cultural Production,” in Feminist Genealogies, Colonial Legacies, Democratic Futures (Routledge, 1996), 213–58.
[^sistren-6]: Margaret Hope, Journey in the Shaping: Report of the First Symposium on Women in Caribbean Culture--July 24, 1981 (Women and Development Unit, University of West Indies, 1981), 53-54.
[^sistren-7]: Ibid.
[^sistren-8]: Olive Lewin, “Rock It Come Over”: The Folk Music of Jamaica (University of the West Indies Press, 2000), 180-83.
[^sistren-9]: Helen Gilbert, ed., Postcolonial Plays: An Anthology (London: Routledge, 2013), 176.
[^sistren-10]: Lewin, Ibid.
[^sistren-11]: Thea Doelwijt, ed., De Grote Caraibische Familie: Een Ooggetuigeverslag van Het Caraibische Kunstfestival Carifesta IV, Barbados, 19 Juli - 3 Augustus 1981 (Paramaribo: Ministerie van Cultuur Jeugd en Sport in Suriname, 1981), 109.